---
title: Productivity cycles and PoPs
date: "2021-06-13 19:00:00"
---

I have discovered a rather strange fact about myself. Whenever I am fully immersed in work, I don’t feel the need to share my thoughts as I am already getting fulfilment out of working. On the other hand, if I find myself in a state of procrastination, I don’t share my thoughts for the same reason; essentially, I already have this feeling of shame that I’m not doing work, hence it would be hypocritical to talk about productivity or anything work related (and when I say share my thoughts, I basically mean publish these blog posts). Well, that begs the question: *what state of productivity am I currently in?*

While I will not attempt to answer the last question, I will ponder, for a little while, about productivity and the mental states that are accompanied by it. A sense of productivity is a sense of fulfilment, in an ideal world. Of course, that feeling starts to fade away slowly over time as things become repetitive and various discouraging roadblocks are faced. In the last year or so, once I started taking a more structural approach to productivity, I have observed a series of “waves” (not the Covid kind) during which I would start being extremely hyped to do a lot of work, with a clear goal in mind, followed by a period of genuinely productive work, which would unfortunately decay into something that wasn’t necessarily unproductive, but in comparison with the work I have done previously definitely suboptimal. This would ultimately lead to a rather short, but still very noticeable period of procrastination. I have noticed a significant difference between the mental state I have in my *“prime of productivity”* and my *“pit of procrastination”* (AKA PoP and PoP) and I don’t quite understand how the transition takes place.

I don’t yet know the solution to this problem, but here are a few things that worked in the past to get me out of the bad PoP to the good PoP (I’ll let you decide which is which in your case). Firstly, start small. At the end of the day, if you’re struggling to get things done, worrying about how much you did last week compared to today is not going to get you into the right mindset. Test the water, finish some small tasks to get the momentum going, then, when you get used to working again, do more. There may be a time when you’re ready to jump straight in, which is fine, but it’s also good to keep calm and carpe diem. Wait, no, keep calm, keep going, and realize when you’ve put too much on your plate and tone it down a bit. Secondly, try something new, like writing about something and posting it on your website for later reference. I have found that *“keeping it fresh”* really *“keeps it fresh”* (I may have to tone it down myself). Slogans aside, when you do something new, it is way easier to get into the right mindset, which makes sense considering that *new* is often accompanied by *difficult*, and difficulty requires a certain degree of mental clarity. 
>If you’re struggling to get things done, worrying about how much you did last week compared to today is not going to get you into the right mindset.

I am by no means an expert on productivity, but every time I complete a new PC (productivity cycle), I find it fascinating to think about what has changed, and how to make the next cycle better. I will see you at the next PC, and don’t let your PoP take away your PoP!
